Writing, living in this world, you know,
very strange things happen in this
world. Very, very strange, inexplicable
things. And that's what the beauty and
miraculousness of this world consists
in. Amitav Ghosh, novelist and
interpreter of the world, past and
present. Do you have to work hard to
separate yourself off from the real
world when you're writing a novel like
this one? Yes, I really have to create a
kind of little bubble of tranquility in
order to be able to write. And that's
becoming harder and harder. Before we
were writing about the planetary crisis,
but now we're in a circumstance where we
have to write from within the crisis.
From Bloomberg Weekend, this is the
Michelle Hussain show.
>> [music]
>> Many novelists draw on the real world
for their fiction, but for more than 30
years, Amitav Ghosh has developed a
global following for deeply researched
books. Ones whose characters take you
into the past or bring urgent
present-day issues to life. He did that
on colonial history, how the opium trade
linked India, China, Britain, and
America. And he started on ecological
threat with a series of novels set
around the Sundarban mangrove forest on
the Bay of Bengal. His latest is called
Ghost I. It has a plot that moves
between India and the United States. And
that's part of Amitav Ghosh's own life
story. Born in Calcutta, he now lives in
New York City.
And this conversation too goes to many
places, real and virtual.
It's lovely to meet you having spent so
many years reading many of your books,
and here we are.
>> There's a part early on in Ghost I that
made me wonder how autobiographical this
book is because
your protagonist in Ghost I, Deen says,
"My memories of the city of my childhood
had ebbed until they came flooding back
half a century later on the other side
of the planet in Brooklyn during the
plague year of 2020. The reason those
lockdown days reminded me of Calcutta
was that during the pandemic too, there
was a sense of darkness closing in or
rather an artificial brightness leaking
out of the world." So, did your memories
come back to you while you were locked
down? Yes, very much, actually. Writing
this book
helped me reconcile various things that
I'd never thought about before.
You know, I was in Calcutta in January
2020, and my mother was very sick.
And my mother was
a very ordinary homemaker.
But she was also someone who had very
strange sorts of perceptions of things.
Odd things would happen around her.
And uh
one day when she was in hospital
literally in front of my eyes, uh she
had a near-death experience.
You know?
And watching that, watching her describe
what she was seeing on the other side
it really unlocked something for me.
What did she actually say? What did she
articulate? You know, the first thing
she did was that she literally said
goodbye to me.
And my wife, my wife was there too, and
she said goodbye in the same way and in
the same tone that she used to say
goodbye to me when I was going off to
boarding school.
And then
her head sort of snapped back
and she began to toss her head from side
to side, and she was telling me in
Bengali what she was seeing. There was a
light, there were people coming towards
her, very welcoming figures. And she was
not at all afraid. These are all classic
near-death uh experience.
>> People calling you. That's right. And
then suddenly, you know, a doctor came
in and gave her this injection, and you
know uh so she sort of came out of it.
But you know, the first thing she said
when she came out of it is, "Why did you
bring me back? I wanted to go. It was my
time." You've put that in the book.
>> yeah.
>> There's a scene exactly like that in the
book. So, it obviously stayed with you
and Very much.
>> I mean, it does sound like an
extraordinary thing to have experienced.
It was, yes. And uh as I said, it
suddenly unlocked things uh you know, in
my brain, and I suddenly began to
realize that, you know
writing, living in this world
you know, there ve- very strange things
happen in this world. Very, very
strange, inexplicable things. And that's
what the beauty and miraculousness of
this world consists in.
And then, a strong theme in Ghost I is
this idea of reincarnation and a child
who's born with memories of a past life.
Where did that thought come from and how
long has that been percolating in your
mind? I've been thinking of it for a
long time. In fact, I touched on it in
an earlier book called The Calcutta
Chromosome. I don't like to use the word
reincarnation because there's a kind of
metaphysic involved in reincarnation,
you know, because
you're implying that there's a whole
sort of cycle of karma and so on. And
maybe that exists. I just don't know
about that. I'm agnostic.
But what I do know is that a very large
number of children
are born with past life memories. Since
this book came out
>> [laughter]
>> I've been contacted by, you know,
literally dozens and dozens of people,
very unlikely people. There are a lot of
these inexplicable things like uh
you know, children being born with a
knowledge of another language. And you
believe that. You don't It's not a It's
not people's perception. It's not
artifice. It's not children putting it
on. It's There's no doubt in your mind
that that phenomenon is real.
No doubt whatsoever. Because uh you
know, the people who've told me about
these experiences and our memories and
so on they're friends, and I trust them.
And what incentive do they have to lie
to me?
I mean, and when there are so many of
them saying that Yeah, I don't mean
lying. I just mean that sometimes our
perception does sometimes lead us to
believe certain things or see certain
things that that someone else might not.
I think the reason I'm particularly
interested in your views on this is that
I've always been struck by how in your
novels, how deeply researched they are.
The The worlds that you create in
fiction, sometimes you've mirrored them
in nonfiction. So, you've shown the real
events that your characters were derived
from. And that's why I'm wondering if
you're doing something a little
different in this book. You're asking us
to
suspend our belief and step into a
different world with you. Yes, very much
so. Why this interests me, why this
phenomenon interests me
is that I think one of the things that's
gone really wrong with the world
is that
you know, because of the mechanistic
ways in which the most powerful people
in the world think about the Earth, you
know, that it's just a machine, that
it's inert, that everything in it can be
known by science or by engineers or
whatever.
The world has lost all its wonder and
its mystery, and that's why
Elon Musk wants to leave our poor you
know, exhausted world and go to Mars or
whatever.
But our Earth is infinitely mysterious,
and I feel that we know almost nothing
about it. You know, science is great,
but you can't use a hammer for every
job.
>> Mhm. The plot moves between Calcutta in
1969. It's the city of your birth. And
New York in 2020. 1969 is, you know, in
the in the West in the in the United
States, it's evocative of the Vietnam
War protests. In the UK, it's probably
more
That's when the troubles in Northern
Ireland entered a new era. What did 1969
mean to you as a 13-year-old in
Calcutta?
In 1969, I was mainly in boarding school
in northern India, following the news
very closely. So, North Vietnam and so
on.
But also, you know, it was a time when
really
uh we in India had a huge kind of
exposure to
American culture
through music most of all.
I think it was the spectacle of what
young people were doing uh in America,
you know.
I often think it's very common for
American politicians to say that people
come here for our freedoms and our
liberties and so on. But in fact uh
really what I think the world found so
attractive in that particular period was
the counterculture.
You know, it wasn't the mainstream
culture at all. It was actually the
counterculture that really made America
into a kind of global leader of youth
culture, if you like, you know. This
reminds me of something I've heard you
say about Calcutta in that period, that
while there was unrest and it was a
politically tense time, there was also a
flowering of culture, the writers, the
filmmakers, the arts of many kinds.
Absolutely. That's the really remarkable
thing. I mean, if you look at the
filmmakers who were working in Calcutta
in the '60s and '70s, I mean, it's an
astonishing number of the great Indian
filmmakers of the past. Most of all,
Satyajit Ray whose work I found
incredibly exciting. Take me back to the
real story behind the unrest in Calcutta
that's that's part of the book. What was
the political climate that surrounded
you, and how do you think it impacted
the writer that you became?
Very much. Calcutta, I should explain,
was then kind of a hotbed of Marxist
activity. There were Maoists, there were
Stalinists. I mean, there were so many
varieties [snorts] of Marxist activists.
And they were a very powerful presence.
They were there as a political presence,
but also as an intellectual presence.
I never subscribed to those ideologies
uh really at all, but still, it was
there. You had to you had to contend
with it. And what made it very
interesting in a way
is that, you know, Calcutta and New New
York are like the opposite ends of the
telescope. I mean Calcutta is the
antithesis of the modern world.
At least it was in that period, you
know.
Uh And New York is the heart of the
modern world. So, in a sense, it's such
a huge
gap to bridge. Mind you, Calcutta is
very different now. I mean, it's really
New York is the home of capitalism in so
many ways. So, I guess that's the
contrast between the two.
>> Yes. Because I've heard you say that
there was something about growing up in
such contentious times that put you in
the mindset of thinking against the
grain.
>> Yeah.
That that is the roots of your work.
That is absolutely the case. Yes. I
think that was the main thing about
growing up there at that time.
That you really learned to be very
critical, very skeptical
of everything, you know. I really
learned to think against the grain and
that stayed with me forever. You are a
writer who's so connected to everyday
events and to present-day politics. I
can see it from your
X feed. I can see that you're re-posting
multiple times a day.
How much does it bleed into your
fiction? Do you have to work hard to
separate yourself off from the real
world when you're actually writing a
novel like this one? Yes. I really have
to create a kind of little bubble of
tranquility in order to be able to
write. And that's becoming harder and
harder. It's becoming impossible now, I
would say.
You know,
before we were writing about the
planetary crisis. It's a political
crisis. It's a geopolitical crisis,
environmental, so many things.
But now,
we're in a circumstance where we have to
write from within the crisis. And that
completely changes your perspective.
I mean, you you have to write from the
point of view of the reality of our
time. And it's a time of absolute
disruption. And you don't just mean
climate, do you? I think I'm get you
mean the state of the world, the war
with Iran. All of these things are are
exercising you at this moment in time.
Very much so. You know,
I wrote a book called The Nutmeg's
Curse. And there I said that the mistake
that Western experts make when they
think about the climate crisis is that
they think of it as a technological and
scientific crisis. Whereas, in fact,
it's a geopolitical crisis.
You know, it's a it's a crisis that's
tied to the fossil fuel economy, which
in itself is the underpinnings and has
been for 200 years
of the Anglo-American empire, you know.
Are you saying there's a link between
that and Iran? Very much so. Absolutely.
It's completely straightforward.
I mean, the reason why Anglo-America has
to try and retain control, most of all
of the Strait of Hormuz,
is exactly this, to control the flow of
fossil fuels. But other parts of the
world, not least India, the country of
your birth, is highly dependent on that.
I mean, how how closely are you
following how badly India's been
affected economically in this period? I
spoke to my sister in Calcutta a couple
of hours ago and she was People are
desperate to find natural gas because,
you know, most of the cooking that's
done in India is done with canisters of
natural gas.
And the situation is really very, very
bad and it's getting worse and worse.
And the situation in India is actually
very serious because the government,
unlike China, didn't stockpile enough
quantities of of fuels.
So, India is very, very vulnerable at
this particular moment.
>> been diplomatically active in this
period, I would say.
What can you say, you know?
Uh
India, in some way,
in over the last few years, most of all,
has completely lost its way
diplomatically within the region.
And it's very hard to see how it can get
back on track. I mean,
you know,
just a few days before this conflict
started in Iran, the Indian Prime
Minister was in Israel,
literally hugging Netanyahu and so on,
despite the fact that these stands are
not at all popular overwhelmingly in
India by any means. Can you say that for
sure that they're not popular? Is it
more amongst your group of people?
Yes. You know, I'm from a part of the
Indian public which is
opposed to these these policy stands.
Look, I mean, even if it's a question of
it being popular or not, just prudence
requires you
to conduct yourself with a certain kind
of caution in relation to to the big
suppliers of oil. So, how would you
describe your relationship with both
these countries that are part of your
life, with India and the United States?
Because this is where you live today.
I presume it's where you feel much more
at home today. But does some of that
feel different in the midst of a of a
moment like this? Well, you know, you
have to remember that one doesn't live
in
a large country like the United States
and
India as if you were geographically
spread across the entirety. I mean, I'm
from Bengal.
>> [clears throat]
>> Uh in Bengal,
our views are often very, very different
from that of other especially of
northern India.
So, you know, I'm influenced by that.
And here I live in New York. I live in
Brooklyn and I have for my mayor a boy
I've known since he was a kid. You knew
his parents. You knew Mira Nair or you
know them.
>> Yes. [laughter] Mira is one of my oldest
friends. We went to college together in
New Delhi. And so, did you ever think
that the the child you knew might go
into politics? Was there a
moment where you thought that that's
where his future might lie? You know, in
our circles, it's so rare
for anyone to go into politics, you
know. I mean, straightforwardly into
retail politics.
So, we used to say to Mira, "Mira, what
is he doing?"
>> [laughter]
>> And Mira would say,
"Well, he's doing it."
But really never would I have guessed
that he'd turn out to be literally a
kind of political phenomenon. I mean, a
genius in a way. What was the moment
that you realized that he could, you
know, he could go all the way in this
mayoral race? Was it before he won the
Democratic primary? Oh, yes. I would say
June or July last year. It was pretty
clear. I mean, he just hit such a chord
with young people, you know. Do you find
yourself worrying though, what happens
if he can't deliver? Because he has
inspired so much political enthusiasm,
you know, he has fervent supporters.
That can just quite easily dissipate if
people get disappointed. You know, the
thing that's been really surprising for
me, I mean, of course, we knew that
Zoran was charismatic. He spoke well.
He's, you know, he's got that killer
smile and so on.
What's really surprised me though is how
competent he is. So, is that the thing
that gives you hope? That you're living
in New York, a city whose
whose mayor you not only know, but you
know, you have a great fondness for. And
is that essentially your retreat I mean
amidst a broader political establishment
that worries you?
Yes, but I think what that tells us is
that there is a huge body of people in
the in the United States, especially
young people,
who are now just longing for
for change, you know. So, can we go back
into history, Amitav? Because I
mentioned this earlier in the
conversation and the fact that so often
you've drawn on great moments in
history. And, you know, and obviously
history is full of difficult moments.
And I'm thinking about your your
charting of the opium trade through your
novels. As
as we're in this process where
it feels like power is shifting, that
there's a new world order developing.
You've thought about India and China a
lot
for your writing. How do you think that
relationship develops? Will India end up
moving closer to China than the United
States? Because the United States is
is a difficult place to be close to,
difficult for its allies these days.
>> Absolutely. You know, the problem for
India
goes beyond any one political party or
any one political figure.
>> [gasps]
>> What we are really seeing
is an era of maritime power
slowly declining and continental power
slowly rising to the top, as it were,
you know. I mean, China and Russia,
Iran, they're the three continental
powers now, you know.
Within this, where does India fit?
India's problem is that it's not a
continental power entirely.
And
it's not entirely a maritime power.
Yet, it is uh in a significant sense
uh dependent on maritime relations. So,
where does India go? I mean, its own
geography puts it in this double bind,
you know.
Where it has to maintain sort of very
close relations with the maritime powers
and at the same time,
it has to try and maneuver within the
new emergent order of continental power.
>> [sighs]
>> It's a huge challenge for anybody to to
navigate that.
And certainly, I think the current uh
dispensation is
not proving to be at all good at it.
>> The current political leadership in
India.
>> It's interesting to hear you call Iran a
continental power and not India one.
Well, India doesn't really reach very
deep into the into the Asian landmass,
you know. It's cut off by the Himalaya,
really. You know, the northern India is,
in some sense, very attached to the
continent. But if you look at India,
it's this huge peninsula that's just,
you know, jutting out into the sea.
So, that maritime aspect of it
uh really has to be balanced against uh
whatever continental ambitions India
might have. And this puts India in a in
a terrible position because it's
perfectly clear now that China is a
world leader in so many different
technologies, you know?
And Pakistan, which is in some way, you
know, maneuvered very well within this
system. It's having a diplomatic moment,
for sure.
>> Oh, absolutely.
>> But in this climate, God knows how long
that lasts. Oh, who knows?
But at least they've been able to take
advantage of Chinese technology.
Whereas India really has, you know,
blocked Chinese technology. So, I mean,
just like the United States, I mean, you
know, just cutting off your foot despite
your face, you know?
Because look at those amazing Chinese
cars that are everywhere now.
And actually, even over here in the US,
I feel sometimes like that I'm going
back to the India of my childhood, where
we drove around in these old old cars,
you know, 20-30 year old cars, and we
envied, you know, the West at that time
for having all these fancy things.
And now, really,
here, because of tariffs, etc.,
we are entering that same cycle. And yet
this is the country that you've chosen,
that you've made your home, of which
you've become a citizen, all of that.
You've done it for a reason, because
it's freedoms represented something that
was precious and important to you. Yes,
absolutely. Absolutely.
And also it's culture, you know? And
there's no gainsaying that, you know? I
mean, the culture
of intellectual excellence that it also
has, it may be sidelined very often, but
within my world, I get to meet many
first-rate thinkers from across the
world.
I get to meet many first-rate artists,
you know, writers, etc.
So, that part of it, which has always
existed and still exists and will
continue to exist,
is what holds me here, not to speak of
my family and my friends. [laughter]
I know that you've you've contributed
a manuscript to or you're in the process
of contributing a manuscript to a really
extraordinary project which began in
2014. It's called the Future Library.
And books are being put away not to be
opened and read until the year 2114.
Which is an which is an extraordinary
idea.
What made you want to be part of it? And
how hard was it to imagine what people
would would want to read
in the year 2114?
Well, you know, I think it's perfectly
evident today that
one of the factors that
are really responsible for creating our
planetary crisis is very short-term is
thinking. We tend to think in like
two-year election cycles, four-year
election cycles, you know?
That kind of thing. And this infects
also the literary and artistic worlds,
you know?
There's a sort of pressure to keep up
with the trend of the moment and so on.
And when I heard about this project, it
struck me that it was absolutely
thinking of time in a completely
different way.
So, you know how in Native American
cultures and many other cultures as
well, there's this concept of thinking
seven generations ahead. Anything you
do, you have to consider the seventh
generation.
And this project struck me as being very
much along those lines of thinking of
time in a radically different way.
And having to produce a text for that
has really been salutary for me to try
and think of, you know, what can I have
to say to a readership that's not yet
born? Is it a full book?
Uh there's no particular specification.
But what did you do? Like how many
pages? And is it fiction or is it
non-fiction? I don't think I'm allowed
to tell you that.
>> [laughter]
>> Okay. [gasps]
Yeah. How did you How did you even start
to
think what your
contribution should be?
Well, of course, the first thing that
you're tempted to do
is to try and imagine the future world,
you know?
And I I made many false starts. I tried
that.
And then I decided that that's actually
a fool's errand, you know?
I mean, if I think about how much the
world has changed within my own
lifetime, and that's obviously
accelerating,
it's impossible for any of us to have a
sense of what the world will be like in
2114. And in fact, you run the risk of
making an ass of yourself, because, you
know, people will open that thing and
say, "Oh, he was so completely wrong."
So, you discounted that? I discounted
that, yeah.
>> And thought instead that you needed to
think of something timeless.
I needed to think of drawing on my own
resources, you know? Of saying what I
need to say, really, rather than trying
to imagine a world afar ahead. It is
really hard to think about what will
the, you know, what will the planet look
like? Um what will borders look like?
You know, there might be nations that
have even
gone by then.
So, you're in the process of handing
over that manuscript. Yes, it'll be at
the end of June. Yes, so I'll
I'll go to Oslo for that. And your own
writing, cuz you said how difficult it
is to separate yourself out and to carve
that kind of
time for your writing away from the
news.
How do you actually do it? What have you
learned? Well, you know, one thing that
helps is that
writing is is all I've ever done, and
I've done it all my life. Along the way,
I've developed certain sort of
disciplines
which just see me through the day and
help me write a little bit.
I'm saying a little bit, but especially
over the last five or six years, I've
written an awful lot, you know, even as
the world is kind of
>> [snorts]
>> falling apart around us. Is it a daily
word count? Cuz when Salman Rushdie came
on the show, he said he was happy if he
does 200 words a day, which I which I
was slightly surprised by, because
um but that's that's where he is. Do you
think in that way? No, but I think 200
words is a is good. I mean, if they're
good words,
>> [laughter]
>> that's good going. So, do you do you
read back the next day or
read back what you've written the day
before? Well, you know, I write in a
very complicated way. First, I write by
hand, then I start typing.
And when I start typing, that's when I
start reading back the next day.
>> But your book start in longhand. Yeah.
Absolutely.
Yes, a longhand with a fountain pen.
If I try to sort of compose directly
onto a computer,
I find that it just it just freezes me,
you know?
Whereas if I'm writing by hand,
I feel much more free, so I can just
follow my thoughts. So, you must have a
library full of the notebooks.
>> Oh, yes. The originals. Yes, I do.
I have a lot of notebooks.
>> And how much do you find that the
ultimate book has changed from the
original notebook, the handwritten one?
It changes a lot, actually. I mean, with
earlier books, they were unrecognizable.
But with this one, it wasn't. You know,
I had a very strange experience writing
this book.
It it was literally like it came from
outside myself, you know?
And the book just seemed to write
itself. I mean, I wrote it it
I usually takes me years to write a
novel, but with this one, it was really
something kind of uncanny, you know?
The only
writer who talks about that experience
in relation to writing is Stephen King,
who often says that his books seem to
come from
somewhere outside himself.
So, do you know yet which um
which place, which dimension even your
next book might take you in?
>> [laughter]
[gasps]
>> Uh you know,
uh yeah.
You know,
look,
let's let's face it.
All our everyday politics
has they've proved utterly ineffectual
in con- in confronting the planetary
crisis that we are in.
The only political movement that has
actually had real effects in this world
is the rights of nature movement, I
would say, you know?
And movements like the North Dakota
pipeline movement, you know, right here
in America, we've had many similar
movements amongst Adivasi groups in
India.
And all these movements, which have been
so effective,
are founded on notions of the sacredness
of the land.
And what they've actually been able to
do
is to mobilize governments into
according personhood to rivers and
mountains and glaciers.
You know, and this has had a real effect
in the world.
Now, imagine what it is for a court in
New Zealand, a high court with the
Supreme Court of New Zealand, to
actually say, "This river
is a person and can be the ancestor of a
group of people."
You know,
it's not just that you're giving rights
to rights to a river. You're making an
ontological shift in the way that you
see the world.
Because these ideas are all based upon
the sacredness of the land, if you like.
And where does sacredness come from? It
comes from the miraculous. I mean, that
obviously that's been part of
Native American culture and and, you
know, Part of Catholic culture.
But it's so far away from our present
moment and the political moment in the
United States and in some other parts of
the world. Yes, absolutely. Again, this
is because of the deep attachments to
the fossil fuel economy,
you know? And these attachments go way
past any
anything to do with means and ends. I
mean, there's a genuine emotional
attachment to fossil fuels. I mean, when
you hear people roaring down the street
on those very noisy motorcycles,
they're not doing it just to get from
one place to another, you know? Um an
electric motorcycle that won't do it for
them. They like that noise. So, Amit, I
have to close having written about um
past lives in this book. I I mean, if if
I asked you to imagine what you would
like to come back as or the life you
might like to have after this, what
would you choose?
That's
That's That's absolutely impossible. I
don't know. Maybe I'd like to be a bird.
Or is there a place in history that
you've written about or research that,
you know, of which your knowledge has
been so deep that, you have been able to
really imagine living in that time or
been drawn towards?
Yes, I mean, certainly I've
I've researched the 19th century in
India
in very great detail.
But I also researched the 12th century
in India.
You know, especially along the west
coast where there were communities of
Muslims, Jews, Hindus
living together. Pre-colonial times.
>> Pre-colonial times, yeah. It was a very
beautiful time. I think I would choose
that.
>> [laughter]
>> Amitav Ghosh, thank you very much.
Congratulations on Ghost I and I look
forward to the next book.
>> Thank you, Michelle, and thank you so
much for having me. It's been a great
pleasure.